Case 4.3 Cheer Coach Monica Aldama
In January 2020, the world was introduced to the Navarro College cheer team and its coach of 25 years,
Monica Aldama, through the Netflix docuseries Cheer.
The six-hour series followed the 40-member team from the small Texas community college as it
prepared over a period of four months for the penultimate event of its season, the 2019 National
Cheerleaders Association championships in Daytona Beach, Florida. At that meet, Navarro College
would be seeking its 14th title in 19 years.
College-level competitive cheer is an exceedingly difficult and dangerous sport. With stunts including
lifts, tumbling, towering pyramids, and basket tosses where a “flyer” is thrown high in the air, does
several twists and turns, and is caught in the arms of the “bases” below, the risk of catastrophic injury is
second only to football according to the National Center for Catastrophic Sport Injury Research
(NCCSIR; Greenspan, 2020). This risk is apparent in the show as team member after team member is
dropped, falls, or is injured while performing stunts. Concussions, fractured ribs, ankle injuries, and
twisted, swollen limbs are the norm. And this is just at team practices.
For the 40 cheerleaders, it’s all about “making mat”—securing one of the 20 spots on the team to
compete at the national championships. For Coach Aldama, it is about creating and executing a two-
minute, 15-second performance with breathtaking stunts that will result in the highest score possible to
secure the team’s legacy.
Coach Aldama records all the practice sessions on her tablet, watching the videos over and over to
determine if the choreography needs to be altered and to monitor how each of the athletes is
performing. She also consults with her two assistant coaches, Andy Cosferent and Kāpena Kea, about
changes to make to the routine, which athletes to push, and which to cut.
As a leader, Coach Aldama sets high expectations for her team regarding their personal conduct, class
attendance, and the effort and work they put into practice. She clearly articulates that accountability is
her number-one criterion. When students don’t meet expectations, there are consequences. The whole
team will be required to run laps if one student sloughs off class. Team members are often roommates,
and Coach Aldama says that, “whereas before they might just walk out and go to class and let their
roommates stay in bed, now they’re going to make sure that that person is up. And they do get mad if
someone’s not there yet. When class is about to start, they’ll start texting them” (Zakin & Weisberg,
2020).
“That’s just a big thing for me—self accountability. If you have a responsibility, you show up for it. If it’s
class, you show up for it. If it’s practice, you show up for it. If it’s a job, you show up for it. If you made
the commitment to do it, you show up,” she says (Zakin & Weisberg, 2020).
Athlete T. T. Barker gets a painful lesson in this when he arrives at practice with a back injury from
competing with another, noncollegiate team after Coach Aldama advised him not to. Coach Aldama
doesn’t cut T. T. any slack, and he continues to practice, repeatedly hoisting flyers overhead, wincing
and grunting in pain until he finally drops to the mat, crying.
Coach Aldama, who has a bachelor’s degree in finance and an MBA, says she first approached
coaching the team from a business perspective. “I was like, okay, what’s the ultimate goal? To win?” she
says. “I started from there and worked backwards (asking) what I need to do to win. And it was very
black and white. ‘There’s a score sheet. I need to get a score. How am I gonna get this score?’
“I really started there, but then quickly realized, ‘Oh, there’s a whole ’nother part of coaching that has
nothing to do with the score sheet. And it’s these kids that are bickering or they broke up with their
boyfriend or you know, okay, now I have to be a psychologist. I have to be an advisor, I have to be a
counselor, I have to be a mother” (Zakin & Weisberg, 2020).
Many of the team members come from difficult life circumstances, and a place on the team is a ticket
out of trouble and hardship. One of those is Morgan Simianer, who lived with an older brother in a
Wyoming trailer after her biological parents abandoned them both at an early age. Morgan has an
unwavering drive to succeed and to please her coach.
“Not everyone in the world has a strong mother figure in their lives . . . Monica has filled the gap [that
was] created by what I didn’t have. I didn’t have anyone to go prom shopping with or talk about my
boyfriend. I think because of that, I am even more appreciative of her and what we share. I feel like her
kid,” she says. “I really idolize her. Monica has changed my life in so many ways and truly helped me
become a better version of myself” (Bennett, 2020).
That devotion is evident in episode five of the show when Morgan goes to the emergency room between
practices for excruciating rib pain caused by “ribiosis,” what team members call the damage to flyers’
ribs caused by repeatedly falling from great heights into the arms of bases. At the ER, Morgan refuses
treatment because the muscle relaxers she’s prescribed would keep her from participating in that
afternoon’s practice, and—despite a warning that more stress on her ribs could damage her organs or
kill her—she leaves and returns to the gym. “If Monica says full-out, I’m going full-out,” she says
(Whiteley, 2020).
Navarro College is located in Corsicana, a small town in a rural, conservative part of Texas. Several of
the male athletes on the team are gay, and despite her Christian faith, Coach Aldama says she “will fight
tooth and nail to protect my boys.”
“I get upset when I see the world being so harsh and not understanding. I am not a very political person
at all. I would say I’m smack in the middle: I’ve got some of the very conservative, some very liberal . . . I
think everyone needs to be open to learning about different people’s lifestyles and not be so closed-
minded,” she says (Silman, 2020).
Nurturing aside, Coach Aldama ultimately makes the very hard decision of selecting the athletes who
will “make mat” and, even if they are chosen for mat, replacing the athletes if they aren’t cutting it. She
has also kicked key members off the team for rule infractions.
“I try to separate the coaching part and the nurturing part. Sometimes I’ll have to ‘mat-talk’ myself to
separate the feelings of ‘I’m going to break this kid’s heart because I’m not going to put them on mat.’ I
love this kid more than anything and I know what they’ve overcome,” she says. “But you know that they
don’t have the skills that this other person does and that’s where it really pulls at your heartstrings and
that’s where I have to be, like, ‘Come on, Monica, you can do this. It’s fine. Just separate it. Just
separate it. Just separate it.’ And I do. I always try to still circle back around and make sure they know
‘You’re still good, you’re still good enough. It’s just that you know right now it’s not your time’” (Zakin &
Weisberg, 2020).
When one team member didn’t make mat, he was encouraged by his teammates to ask the coach why.
He resisted, saying he thought it would be disrespectful to question her. When he finally did ask, she
told him “he was not putting himself out there.”
“I’m very honest with them. I will let them know, pull them to the side and tell them, ‘I feel like maybe you
don’t want it as badly as someone else or you don’t have that fight in you. Which makes me worried
about are you going to have that fight when it’s go-time.’ I know I’m very honest because how are they
going to know?” (Zakin & Weisberg, 2020).
As a result, the team member put in twice the amount of effort and adjusted his contributions in practice
and ultimately made mat.
Coach Aldama appears patient, calm, and composed, even in crisis. In the national competition, one of
the team members, Austin Bayles, was injured, and a replacement had to be made. The person
replacing Austin had to learn his new role in mere minutes.
“When we were at finals and Austin got hurt, I was proud of myself because I literally went into focus
mode. And although I was terrified, I couldn’t even go there because I was so focused on what we
needed to do to fix it in a very short time span,” she says. “I definitely have always told myself no matter
what I’m feeling inside, I can’t let the team know. Because cheerleading is a very mental game. We can
do all this work preparing mentally, but if they see me looking terrified or scared or losing it, all that work
we’ve done could go down the drain” (Silman, 2020).
“I’m very competitive and I want to be successful, but I also want to be that person that leads by
example. I really set a high standard for myself,” Coach Aldama says (Church, 2020).
Questions
1. How would you describe Coach Aldama’s leadership behavior in terms of initiating structure and
consideration? Is she more task oriented or relationship oriented?
2. Where on the Blake and Mouton Leadership Grid would you place Coach Aldama? Defend your
answer.
3. How would you describe Coach Aldama’s leadership behavior in terms of paternalism/maternalism?
4. Do you think the leadership behavior of opportunism could apply to Coach Aldama? Explain your
answer.